# Nine examples of innovative motivation

Nine examples of innovative motivation systems are presented in this and the next chapter. They all can  work in parallel with conventional bank-debt money, use cost-effective electronic media, and should be as transparent as possible to its users. By making these systems more self-policing, such transparency could go a long way to reduce potential fraud. The sequence in which the systems are presented starts with the easiest and least controversial and ends with the most complex and revolutionary. The first five can be started privately, either by NGOs or businesses. They are:

-  Doraland: a system proposed for Lithuania, with the purpose of creating a “Learning Country.” In such a country everybody can volunteer to learn and/or teach, and be rewarded in Doras, a currency whose purpose is to help people realise their dreams. This would best be implemented by a NGO.
-  Wellness Tokens: a NGO initiative working in cooperation with preventive healthcare providers to deal with healthcare issues, preventively, even before they arise. Wellness Tokens reward and encourage healthy behaviours and thereby reduce long-term medical expenses for society.
-  Natural Savings: a financial savings product that is fully backed by living trees. It would be a savings currency with inflation protection superior to that of any national currency, while simultaneously provides an incentive to reforest areas and thereby create long-term carbon sinks. Another of its qualities: it  works well also  for micro-savings.  
-  C3: a business-to-business (B2B) system that reduces unemployment by providing working capital to small and medium-sized businesses. The network’s clearing currency would be fully backed by high-quality invoices and convertible into conventional money on demand. The insurance industry and banks both play critical and profitable roles in this system. C3s are operational today in Brazil and Uruguay, and the latter country accepts C3s in payment of all taxes.
-  Terra: a global B2B currency proposal that would make it profitable for multinational companies to think long-term, thereby resolving the conflict between short-term financial corporate priorities and long-term social and environmental needs. It would be an inflation-proof and crash-proof global currency fully backed by a basket of commodities and services relevant to the global economy. The Terra would be a global currency distinct from any existing national currency thus reducing the risk of geopolitical tensions around monetary zones of influence.


The next four examples of innovative motivation systems are governmental initiatives started at a city, regional or country level. They are:
-  Torekes: a city-based initiative to encourage volunteering while promoting green behaviour and social cohesion in a poor neighbourhood. It is operational since 2010 in the city of Ghent, Belgium.
-  Biwa: a proposal for the Biwa Prefecture in Japan to fund the labour components of the ecological restoration and maintenance of Lake Biwa, the oldest and largest lake in Japan. It could be either voluntary or obligatory for households resident in the area.
-  Civics: a proposal empowering a city or region to fund civic activities without burdening their budgets. These activities could provide the labour component for social, educational and/or ecological projects. Such a system could also take the form of a compulsory contribution. 
-  ECOs: a national or Europe-wide system making it possible to fund critical components of large-scale ecological projects, such as climate change prevention and adaptation projects. It would be an interest-free currency issued by governments. Governments would require businesses to make a contribution proportional to their total sales, payable only in ECOs. This is the most controversial of the nine proposals, because it would be seen as a new type of corporate tax on the largest corporations. Such an initiative may require governments to “declare war” on run-away climate change.
Not all nine systems – five private and four public - must be implemented before the benefits of different monetary ecosystems start manifesting themselves. Each community, city, region or country can pick and choose which kinds of systems it implements. Together with a dozen of other designs already in operation in the world, each combination of such new exchange media would give an appropriate monetary ecosystem a chance to emerge. Some of these systems will fail. However, just like in a forest, the most successful types will spontaneously tend to spread. We still have much to learn, particularly about which governance structures that are most appropriate for each type of system.

## source :
Dennis Meadows in  Money - Sustainability: The Missing Link by Bernard Lietaer. Christian Arnsperger, Sally Goerner and Stefan Brunnhuber 2012