# Scarcity vs abundance  

the non-material nature of information. Information is not subjected to the physical constraint of the conservation of matter and energy, and therefore to the economic constraint of scarcity: once you have gotten a piece of information, such as a computer program, you can multiply and distribute it without limit, at virtually no cost. Giving away these copies to others does not deprive the original owner. The fact that you use a particular piece of information does not in any way preclude somebody else from using the same information at the same time. This property is called NON-RIVALRY in economics (e.g. Martens, 2004). While it puts the fundamental economic assumption of scarcity on its head, economic theory has as yet little to say about how to deal with non-rival goods (De Long & Froomkin, 1998). 

Another important property of information is its PARTIAL EXCLUDABILITY: while you could in principle exclude somebody else from using the same information, e.g. via copyright law, patenting or copy protection, the easy replication of information makes this prohibition increasingly difficult to implement. This is a problem for traditional economics, which assumes that the producer of a good, whether rival or not, needs an incentive to continue producing it, and for that must have some means to enforce consumers of that good to pay for it (Martens, 2004; De Long & Froomkin, 1998). Yet, in open access communities we see a very different structure of incentives. First, the non-rivalry of information explains why open access development can function with relatively few incentives: assuming that you have the needed resources (hardware, software, expertise, time...) to produce a piece of information that you want for yourself (e.g. a program, a bibliography, a poem, a photo of your dog...), then it hardly costs you more to also make it available to others. Thus, a minor investment of your own time such as a hobby, an accidental discovery or a quick hack, can nevertheless produce an information good that benefits thousands (cf. Ghosh, 1998).
