# selfish motivations  

**There are selfish motivations for making your work open access: Social recognition, Feedback, Learning** .



The minimal effort of sharing your results with others will be more than compensated for by the fact that these others may in turn produce or suggest improvements that benefit the creator. For example, your interest in a particular historical figure or geographic location may lead you to write down what you know about the subject in a Wikipedia article. 

This article is likely to incite others to add details that you weren’t aware of, thus in turn helping you advance. Moreover, expressing it in an explicit, public form is likely to provide you with feedback (which can be as little as someone saying “nice work”, or you noticing that the program isn’t used quite as expected). Feedback (“reinforcement”) is the basic driver of learning. Thus, even if your actual product is not improved by publicizing it, your expertise in producing it may well be. If the opportunity of getting a better product and becoming better yourself is not enough of an incentive, there is an even stronger motivation for contributing to the collective. Indeed, doing so makes you visible within the community, earning you recognition for your expertise, activity, and altruism. Psychologists have proposed that earning esteem, status, or a good reputation within your community is a fundamental human drive (Maslow, 1970). From the point of view of evolutionary psychology (Buss, 1995), it is probably even more basic than gaining wealth, since during most of (pre)history the person with the highest status in the group would anyway get the best access to material resources—in addition to other resources, such as mates, friends, help, or information. Surveys have shown that the development of a good reputation in the field is indeed a concrete incentive for many open source developers (Lerner & Tirole, 2002). One of the ways in which these developers can still earn a conventional income is by giving away their information products (e.g. software or blogs) for free, but demanding a fee for consultancy. Indeed, once complex software is adopted by many users, some of these may be willing to pay for help with specific problems by consulting the only true experts, namely the ones who wrote the software. Creators of literary or artistic content may adopt similar methods. For example, a rock group may give away their recordings for free, but once they have established sufficient popularity in that way, they can charge people for attending their concerts. Similarly, authors or journalists may provide free access to their texts (e.g. blogs), but make money by charging for interviews or lectures given to a restricted audience. This way of earning money makes more sense than selling access to proprietary information, since it focuses on the one thing that effectively becomes more scarce in an information society: personal attention (Simon, 1971). Whatever amount of information a person makes freely accessible, an important part of his or her expertise still remains tacit (Reber, 1993), and therefore not available for easy replication. Such intuitive knowledge will only come to the surface when it is used to tackle a particular problem or question. Since a person has only a limited time, energy or attention to spend on any particular issue, this implicit knowledge does not obey the property of non-rivalry or unlimited replicability that characterizes explicit information. Therefore, the laws of economics dictate that people will be willing to pay in order to get access to the personal attention of an expert. However, if you want to sell your advice to others for good money, you will have to convince them of your authority in the matter. Here reputation becomes a major factor. An even more direct way to get recognition for your expertise is by making its products publicly (and preferably freely) available, so that people can judge for themselves how good you are. This is much more difficult if you work for a firm, since outsiders can only get a dim view of who contributed what within a closed organization (cf. Lerner & Tirole, 2002). A similar mechanism is already used in the academic world: scientists’ level of expertise is judged primarily by the quantity and quality of their publications, while their eventual income is largely dependent on that perceived level of expertise. Research has shown that making a publication open access increases the number of citations it gets, which is the most direct measure of the visibility and reputation of its author (Hajjem, Harnad & Gingras, 2005). What this system of remuneration still lacks is a way to pay for the initial investments that have to be made before one can start to produce useful information. This includes hardware, software, Internet access, and education. Happily, all these factors are quickly declining in price thanks to on-going progress in information technology. The most expensive part, basic education, is provided (nearly) for free in most countries, as the burden is being shouldered by society as a whole—which has long ago understood that a well-educated workforce is to everybody’s benefit. More advanced education typically remains expensive, although scholarships tend to be available for those who show most promise (e.g. in the work they have already published). But here again, advances in information production, distribution and the open access philosophy that tends to go with it, hold the promise that soon educational material for any domain will be available for free on the Internet.

Why is Open Access Development so Successful? Stigmergic organization and the economics of information, Heylighen F. 2007.
