# Fractals
In the late 1950s, Mandelbrot began to study  the geometry of a wide variety of irregular natural phenomena, and during the 1960s he realized that all these geometric forms had some very striking common features.

Over the next ten years, Mandelbrot invented a new type of mathematics to describe and analyze these features. He coined the term "fractal" to characterize his invention and published his results in a spectacular book, *The factal geometry of nature* (Mandelbrot 1983), which had a tremendous influence on the new generation of mathematicians who were developping chaos theory and other branches of nonlinear dynamics.

The most striking proporty of these fractal shapes is that their characteristic pattern are found  repeatedly  at descending scales, so that their parts, at any scale, are similar in shape to the whole.

Mandelbrot illustrates this propoerty of self similarity by y breaking a piece out of a cauliflower and pointing out that, by itself, the piece looks just like a small cauliflower. He repeats this demonstratino by dividing the part further, taking out another piece, which again looks like a very small cauliflower. thus every part looks lije the whle vegetable. the shape of the whole is similar to itself at all levels of scales.

There are many other examples of self-similarity in nature. Rockso mountains look like small mountains; branches of lightning, or borders of clouds, repat the same pattern again and again, coastline divide into smaller and smaller portions, each showing similar arrangements of beaches and headlands. Photographs of a river delta, the ramifications of a tree, or the repeated branching of blood vessels may show patterns of such striking  similarity that we are unable to tell which is which. This similarity of images from vastly different scales has been known for a long time, but before Mandelbrot, noboody had a mathematical language to describe it.

(...)

**To model the fractal shapes that occur in nature, geometric figures can be constructed that exhibit precise self-similarity. the principal technique for constructing these mathematical fractals is iteration - that is, repeating a certain geometric operation again and again. The process of iteration, which lead to baker transformation, the mathematical characteristics underlying strange attractors, thus reveal itself as the central mathematical feature linking chaos theory and fractal geometry.**

One of the simplest fractal shape generated by iteration is the so-called Kocj curve or snowflake curve. the geometric operatoin consists of dividing a line into three equal parts and replacing the center section by y two sides of an equilateral triangle. By repeating this operation again and again on smaller and smaller scales, a jagged snowflake is created. Like a coastline, the Koch curve becomes infinitely long if the iteration is continued to infinity. Indeed the Koch curve can be seens as a very rough model of a coastline.
p117-118.
(...)
And yet this structure, whose richness defies the human imagination is generated by a few very simple rules. Thus fractal geometry, like chaos theory, has forced scientists and mathematicians to re-examine the very concept of complexity. In classical mathematics, simple formulas correspond to simple shapes; complicated formulas to complicated shapes.

In nonlinear dynamics the situation is dramatically different. **Simple equations may generate enormously complex strange attractors, and simple rules of attractions give rise to structures more complicated than we can even imagine.**

# Feedback and iterations

The third important property of non-linear systems is a surprising differences in case-and-effect relationships. In linear systems, small changes produces small effects, and large effects are due either to large changes, or to a sum of many small changes. In non linear systems, by contrast, small changes may have dramatic effects because they may be amplified repeatedly by self reinforcing feedback. Such nonlinear feedback processes are the basis of the instability and sudden emergence of new forms of order that are so characteristic of self organization. 

Mathematically, **a feedback loop correspond to a special kind of nonlinear processes known as iteration (latin for repetition), in which a function operates repeatedly on itself.** 

Capra and Luisi, p 105
